---
title: Career Opportunities
description: >
  What type of job should I expect to obtain once leaving college? 
weight: 4
cascade:
  - type: "docs"
---

While possessing the skills of a chemical engineer is undoubtedly valuable, it's equally essential to consider the array of opportunities that lie ahead for individuals in this field. To gain a broader perspective, I had the privilege of conducting an interview with Dave Whalen, a retired chemical engineer who held multiple significant positions at esteemed companies like General Electric and Johnson & Johnson. Through his insightful narrative, Mr. Whalen unveiled a remarkable 39-year career journey characterized by diverse roles and responsibilities. Throughout his illustrious career, Mr. Whalen ventured into an array of roles, ranging from being a lead technologist and consulting engagement lead at General Electric to assuming positions such as the director of the Global Supply Chain department and the head of Value Chain Analytics. His experiences underscored the versatility of a chemical engineer's career path. 

One key piece of advice from Mr. Whalen profoundly impacted my perspective. He emphasized that in the real world, senior executives are primarily concerned with understanding the problem at hand and how to effectively address it. This insight shed light on how the broader professional landscape would perceive the value of a chemical engineering degree. Mr. Whalen illuminated the role of a chemical engineer as something more than a mere job description. He described encountering numerous challenges and frequently tackling chemistry-based issues, spanning from plastics to pharmaceuticals. However, he emphasized that he often needed to transcend his role as a chemical engineer to accomplish his tasks effectively. The challenge lies in adapting and presenting these skills effectively to cater to the specific needs and expectations of diverse professional environments and collaborators. 

Exploring the career journey of a former chemical engineer was enlightening, but I'm still committed to charting my own path in this field while maintaining a healthy work-life balance. At the moment, my future professional goals center on diving into the dynamic world of Research and Development. Beyond that, I aspire to merge my knowledge of chemical engineering with the entrepreneurial side of the healthcare sector, with a vision to make medical devices more accessible and affordable. One of the intriguing aspects of being a chemical engineer is its adaptability, allowing professionals to smoothly navigate between the realms of research and the intricate world of business. 

Furthermore, the financial prospects in this field are compelling, with an average annual salary of $106,260 according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. This not only underscores the feasibility of my career aspirations but also ensures a comfortable standard of living in various parts of the United States, enhancing the allure of this profession. The profession is also steadily growing at an 8% rate, allowing me to be able to get a job out of college. 

In my career path, I aim to engage with a wide range of disciplines, wearing different hats as I go along. My primary goal is to have the flexibility to take on various roles, which I see as essential for both personal growth and innovation. Sticking to the same job for too long can limit the development of crucial skills needed for advancing to higher positions. While I'm not certain about the specific positions I'll pursue, I aspire to reach director-level and manager-level roles. Thankfully, the field of chemical engineering offers great prospects for advancement, thanks to its diversity, which enables individuals to build a diverse skill set and move up the professional ladder.	 