---
title: Engineering Strengths
description: What are some of the pros and cons of engineering?
date: 2017-01-05
weight: 3
---

Engineering is not only one of the most sought-after and respected majors but also a field that demands a specific set of skills for success. In this context, I aim to highlight the essential skills that a chemical engineer must possess to excel in their career and illustrate how I have demonstrated these strengths in various aspects of my life.
Analyzing data is a critical skill for chemical engineers. As highlighted in the description of chemical engineering by the University of Washington, “Chemical engineers employ and design data science methods to visualize, analyze and predict chemical and biological properties. Data is obtained in a multitude of ways, ranging from high throughput instrumentation, gene sequencers, to computational simulations.” 

Throughout their careers, chemical engineers are tasked with the responsibility of observing and dissecting data to comprehend how systems operate and to develop data-driven engineered processes. Consequently, it is imperative for me to possess the capability to effectively analyze and gather data. Fortunately, I already have a strong foundation in analytical skills, as evidenced by my results from the Clifton Strengths assessment. This proficiency equips me with one of the essential skills needed for success in the field of chemical engineering. Moreover, I further refined my analytical data skills during my senior year of high school while conducting research at the North Montgomery Career Technical Center. This experience allowed me to sharpen my abilities by meticulously documenting observations from the laboratory experiments in which I participated.

In addition, it is all but imperative for engineers to have problem-solving skills. Engineering, as a major, is all about problem-solving. In an article published by Stanford researchers, they state that “approximately 50% of departments use these [chemical engineering] courses as evidence that students are learning how to identify, formulate, and solve engineering problems, and 50% report that these courses teach students how to design a chemical engineering system or component.” Both parts mention have aspects of problem solving integrated in the chemical engineering pathway, making it a crucial skill for engineers to possess in the workplace. Although I've applied problem-solving skills in various aspects of my life, a notable illustration was my participation in the First Lego League competition, where I constructed a LEGO robot. This robot required precise programming and the attachment of specific tools to accomplish tasks on the course. The process of designing these components, deliberating on which tasks to tackle, and programming the robot significantly enhanced my problem-solving abilities. This experience played a pivotal role in initiating my path as a chemical engineer, imparting valuable lessons in logical thinking and the importance of efficiently achieving objectives.

Finally, communication and teamwork are both skills that are necessary for any career, but especially in chemical engineering. The National Library of Medicine states that “teamwork is another important skill required of graduate engineers, and while it is difficult to define, it is regarded here as a social strategy built upon knowledge, attitudes, skills, and the ability to combine cognitive appreciation from all team members.” In both educational and professional settings, collaboration stands as an essential cornerstone for chemical engineers. Whether engaged in research and development or immersed in the intricacies of data analytics, these individuals operate as a cohesive unit, pooling their collective expertise to surmount any challenges that may arise during the developmental process. One of the most gratifying instances of teamwork that I have had the privilege of participating in occurred during my tenure on the high school water polo team. During one practice, our coach orchestrated an exercise that required the entire team to pass the ball among themselves, with a caveat that prohibited passing to a teammate treading water adjacent to us, and each player could only handle the ball once. Amidst the ensuing chaos, my fellow captains and I collaborated diligently to ensure adherence to these rules. This exercise demanded a significant degree of cooperation to guarantee compliance from every participant. It remains one of my cherished team-building experiences, one from which I intend to draw upon and apply in both my academic pursuits and future professional endeavors.
